# Containerizing a Flask Web App

We are going to create a container for simple flask web application.

**Scenario**: This is a simple flask web application based on github, we are going to containerize it.

**Source Code URL**: https://github.com/LondheShubham153/flask-app-ecs.git

**Output**: Hello Dosto, welcome to DevOps Zero To Hero (Junoon Batch 9)

<br>

### Step-1: Clone Application from Github:

- Clone your application from github using github url.

Example:
```
git clone https://github.com/LondheShubham153/flask-app-ecs.git
```

After cloning, you will get these multiple files:
- Dockerfile
- Dockerfile-multi
- app.py: application code.
- requirements.txt
- run.py: file to run web application.

Here, remove the Dockerfile and Dockerfile-multi, because these are already created and we need to create our own dockerfile.

### Step-2: Create a Dockerfile

```
FROM python:3.11-alpine

WORKDIR /app

COPY . /app

RUN pip install -r requirements.txt

EXPOSE 80

CMD ["python","run.py"]
```

### Step-3: Build Dockerfile

```
docker build -t flask-app:v1 .
```

### Step-4: Create Container or Run Image

```
docker run -d -p 80:80 flask-app:v1
```

- ```-d```: It means detach mode, means to run your application in background.
- ```-p```: port mapping, map your system port with container port. 80:80, means first 80 represents your device port and second 80 represents container port.
- ```flask-app:v1```: image name

### Step-5: Get container access url to access your application

- Get container logs, you will get your url in logs.
```
docker logs <container_id>
```

### Step-6: Access your application

Enter the url which is given in logs into browser and you will access your application.

### Step-7: Attach your terminal with container logs terminal

This is we are attaching our os terminal with container logs terminal so that we can live see the logs of the running application in container.

```
docker attach <container_id>
```
