# Networking in Docker

Docker networking is the system in docker that allow two or more container communicate with each other.

```Docker networkin के thorugh एक container दूसरे container से communicate कर सकता है मतलब एक container दूसरे container को data भेज सकता है और दूसरे container से data recieve कर सकता है|```

Docker Networking is the system that allows Docker containers to communicate with:
- Each other (container-to-container communication).
- The Docker host (the machine running Docker). It means container can communicate to your machine on which you are running docker.
- The external world (like the internet). It means container can communicate to the internet.


Docker Networking ka kaam hai:
- Containers ke beech aur container se bahar (host ya internet) ke beech communication karwana.

Docker networking ke through:
- ek container dusre container se communicate karta hai.
- container host machine se communicate karta hai aur.
- container internet se communicate karta hai.

Matlab container ke beech main communication hota hai docker networking ke through.

<br>

### Why Does Docker Need Networking?

When you run applications in Docker containers:
- Each container is isolated, like a tiny virtual machine.
- But in real applications don’t run alone — they need to talk to other services.
- For example:
  - A web server container needs to connect to a database container.
  - An app might need to send data to an analytics service.
  - Multiple instances of a service might need to talk to each other.
 
Docker Networking manages how this communication happens securely, efficiently, and flexibly.

<br>

### What Happens Between Containers?

**Without Docker Networking**

If containers had no networking:
- They’d be completely isolated.
- No way to talk to each other or the outside world.

**With Docker Networking**

When Docker networking is configured:
- Containers can communicate with each other.
- They can securely send data between themselves.
- You can control who can talk to who using network rules and configurations.
- You can connect containers to specific networks or multiple networks at once.
- You can map container ports to host ports to expose services.

**Example scenario**
- Container A (web server) can ping Container B (database) using a private IP address or a DNS name like ```db```.
- Container A can access the internet through the Docker bridge, without exposing itself to the public.

<br>

### Types of Networks in Docker

There are mainly 7 types of network in docker. These are network driver.

- Bridge (Default).
- Host.
- User Defined Bridge (Custom).
- None.
- MACVLAN (Docker Swarm).
- IPVLAN.
- Overlay.

But MACVLAN, IPVLAN, OVerlay, we use these networks with docker swarm which is out dated now. But we will most focus in Bridge, Host, Custom Bridge, None. These are most common.

<br>

### Bridge Network

A **bridge** network is a private internal network created by Docker on a single host. 

Containers connected to the same bridge network can communicate with each other directly via their IP addresses, while being isolated from external networks unless explicitly published through port mapping.

The bridge network is the default network driver for containers. When you run a container without specifying a network, it connects to the bridge network by default.

By default:
- When Docker is installed, it automatically creates a default bridge network called ```bridge```.
- Any container you run without specifying a network gets connected to this bridge network.

Bridge ek default Docker network type hai jo ek private internal network banata hai containers ke liye. Iske andar sab containers ek dusre se communicate kar sakte hain via IP

### How it works internally?

**Jab hum Docker install karte hain**:
- Docker ek default bridge network create karta hai, jiska naam hota hai: ```bridge```.
- Iske saath ek Linux bridge interface banta hai: ```docker0```. This acts like a virtual Ethernet switch inside your host.
- Ye Linux bridge interface ek virtual switch ka kaam karta hai — jisme containers plug-in ho jaate hain.
- Each container gets a virtual Ethernet interface (veth pair).
- When you start a container:
  - Docker creates a veth pair: two virtual network interfaces that are connected like a pipe.
  - One end is attached to the container’s network namespace.
  - The other end is attached to the ```docker0``` bridge on the host.

**Jab aap container run karte ho (e.g. docker run nginx)**:
- Agar aap kuch specify nahi karte ```--network``` flag se, toh container automatically default bridge network me chala jaata hai.
- Container ko ek private IP milti hai, jaise ```172.17.x.x```.
- Ye IP ```docker0``` ke subnet se hoti hai.
- Container ke andar DNS hota hai jisse woh internet access bhi kar sakta hai NAT ke through. Iska matlab hai container by default internet ko access kar sakta hai.

**NOTE**: When we create a two tier application with Frontend and Database. Frontend needs data from database to run perfectly. So, by default containers can not communicate directly with each other. They can communicate using their ip but ip can change by time. So, we consider that contiainers can not communicate with each other.

### Why containers don’t talk to each other in default bridge?

Jab aap 2 containers run karte ho:
```
docker run -d --name web nginx
docker run -d --name app httpd
```

Dono default bridge me jaate hain, lekin default bridge network mein container-name se communication ka support nahi hota. So agar web container app ko access karna chahe:
- ```ping app``` ❌ fail hoga
- IP se karoge toh kaam karega — but IP dynamic hoti hai, toh reliable nahi ha.

**NOTE**: So is problem ko deal karne ke liye hum custom bridge banate hain jisse containers apas main ek dusre se by name connect kar pate hain.

### Why we need custom bridge for multi-tier applications?

Multi-tier app ka matlab hota hai: e.g. frontend + backend:
- Frontend needs to talk to backend.
- Backend may need to talk to DB.

Agar aap custom bridge banao:
```
docker network create my-bridge
```

Phir containers ko isme run karo:
```
docker run -d --name backend --network my-bridge backend-image
docker run -d --name frontend --network my-bridge frontend-image
```

Toh ab:
- Frontend backend ko container-name se access kar sakta hai:``` http://backend:port```.
- Ye name-based service discovery enable karta hai.
- Internally Docker ek DNS server chalaata hai network ke andar jo ye kaam karta hai

To jab custom bridge network se containers by name connect kar sakte hain to agar dynamic ip change bhi hota hai kisi bhi reason se to containers ke beech main by name connectivity bani rahegi. Isliye hum containers ko connect karne ke liye custom bridge network use karte hain.

**Diagram**:
```
HOST
├── docker0 (default bridge)
│   ├── containerA (172.17.0.2)
│   └── containerB (172.17.0.3)
│       [Can't resolve names by default]

├── br-abc123 (custom bridge)
│   ├── containerX (172.18.0.2, name: 'db')
│   └── containerY (172.18.0.3, name: 'web')
│       [Can resolve names using Docker DNS]
```

<br>
<br>

### Host Network
