# Project: Connecting Frontend with Database using Custom Bridge Network

**Scenario**: We are creating a Frontend app using Flask which we are connecting with MySql database. So that frontend app can access data from database. This is a Two-Tier application project. Here, we will persist the database data into volume. Steps are same as 7th step, we will extend volume mount from 8th step.

**How we will be doing it?**
- Get the Two-Tier application from github.
- Create custom bridge network.
- Run the both container adding with custom bridge network.
- You can access the application.

### Step-1: Get the code from Github

We have to clone the code from url: https://github.com/LondheShubham153/two-tier-flask-app.git

```
git clone https://github.com/LondheShubham153/two-tier-flask-app.git
```

There will be docker file in the code, we have to use that docker file. I am mentioning that dockerfile below.

**DockerFile**
```
# Use an official Python runtime as the base image
FROM python:3.9-slim

# Set the working directory in the container
WORKDIR /app

# install required packages for system
RUN apt-get update \
    && apt-get upgrade -y \
    && apt-get install -y gcc default-libmysqlclient-dev pkg-config \
    && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

# Copy the requirements file into the container
COPY requirements.txt .

# Install app dependencies
RUN pip install mysqlclient
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir -r requirements.txt

# Copy the rest of the application code
COPY . .

# Specify the command to run your application
CMD ["python", "app.py"]
```

### Step-2: Build the Docker image from docker file

Now build the docker image from docker file using below command

```
docker build -t two-tier-app:v1 .
```

It will generate your docker image with name two-tier-app:v1

### Step-3: Create a Custom Bridge Network 

Create a custom bridge network so that app and database container both can connect with each other.

```
docker network create two-tier -d bridge
```

### Step-4: Run a MySQL database container with custom bridge network

Run a mysql database container with custom bridge network, so that mysql container can connect to network.

```
docker run -d --name mysql --network two-tier -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=devops mysql
```

A sql container will be running now which will be connected to bridge network.

### Step-5: Run you app container with custom bridge network

Run your app container with custom bridge network, so that app can connect to database container.

```
docker run -d -p 5000:5000 --network two-tier -e MYSQL_HOST=mysql -e MYSQL_USER=root -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DB=devops two-tier-app:v1
```

### Step-6: Your app will be running

You can access your app on ```127.0.0.1:5000```

### Step-7: Check data in database

If you want to check the data in database, you can go inside mysql container and login to mysql

```
docker exec -it mysql bash

mysql -u root -p root

show databases;

#Table would be messages

show tables;

select * from messages;
```

<br>

## Storing the database data into host machine permanently using Volumes

### Step-8: Create a docker volume

Create docker volume using below command.
```
docker volume create mysql-data
```
- It will create a directory at ```/var/lib/docker/volumes/mysql-data/_data``` in your host machine.

### Step-9: List the volumes

List all the created volumes.
```
docker volume ls
```

### Step-10: Inspect your volume

Inspect the volume you created ```mysql-data```.
```
docker volume inspect mysql-data
```
- It will show you the details of it.

### Step-11: Stop and remove if mysql is runnning

When i am writing this text, in my linux machine a mysql container was running already. i stopped it so have written this step.

If mysql is not running in your case, you can move to step-12.

```
docker stop mysql && docker rm mysql
```

### Step-12: Mount the volume with mysql and run mysql

Now mount the ```mysql-data``` volume with mysql container so that data can be persisted on your hard disk.

```
 docker run -d --name mysql -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql --network two-tier -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=devops mysql
```
- ```mysql-data``` volume is binding with ```/var/lib/mysql/```. This is the directory where mysql store its data in container.

### Step-13: Restart the web app

When i am writing this text, in my linix web app is running now. So, after mounting the volume with mysql container. You have to restart your web app it is running while mounting. In my case web app was running in backgrond.

If web app container is not running, you can run your web app container.

```
docker restart <container_id>
```

### Step-14: Now Stop and Remove mysql and re-run container to test data persistent or not

Now stop and remove and re-run mysql container to check is data is persisted or not. If volume is created and mounted then removing container and re-run with existed volume can perist the same data in the mysql again.

```
docker stop mysql && docker rm mysql
```

After stopping mysql, you can refresh your web the will give you some error because database is not connected with web app.

Run the mysql with ```mysql``` volume:

```
docker run -d --name mysql -v mysql-data:/var/lib/mysql --network two-tier -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=devops mysql
```

### Step-15: Now you test your web app

Now test you web app, you will see the data the you have stored is listed there. DONE!!!

<br>
<br>

### You can attach bind mount also.

### Step-1: Create a directory of your choice in your linux.

Now create a directory ```/home/puneet/projects/projec-3-connect-two-containers/volumes/mysql```. It will mount with your mysql container and mysql data will be stored here.

### Step-2: Run mysql container with bind mount

Now mount this directory with mysql and run mysql

```
docker run -d --name mysql -v /home/puneet/projects/projec-3-connect-two-containers/volumes/mysql:/var/lib/mysql --network two-tier -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=devops mysql
```

You directory will be mounted and you will store the data there permanently.

DONE!!!
